Olfactory Technology
-Rishabh Poria

Imagine watching a YouTube video about the recipe to make your favourite dish and you being able to smell it. Even better, reading a novel and that 'woody'; or as some would say 'earthly' smell tingle your neural senses. Well, work towards Olfactory technology has been going on for the past few decades.
Scentronix, a Netherlands-based start-up, already operates a perfume printing machine. The machine uses an algorithm to create a scent based on answers to a questionnaire. But now, they want to make a wearable necklace so that this immersive sensory experience can be made mobile. Scentronix, however, is not the first one trying to work on this.
Poems of ancient Greece describe how doves' wings were scented to spread the aroma of fragranced oils over people gathered for a feast. Perfumes and incense also play a significant role in religious rituals and ceremonies. Several attempts to screen films with scents started as early as 1916 when the annual Rose Bowl American Football screened in a cinema hall filled with rose oil.
In 1939, at the World's Fair in New York, Smellovision presented a prototype with pipes attached to viewers' seats & delivered smells in sync with images shown on the screen. The same scent technology was used in 1960 when Scent of Mystery got released. However, the technology didn't work very well because clearing an odour in time for each scene was not easy.
In 1991, Linda Buck and Richard Axel, who later went on to win the Nobel Prize for their work in 2004, published that our sense of smell relies upon about 1000 different genes. These genes reside in a small area of tissue in our upper part of nasal cavities. Each cell expresses a type of receptor but together, they allow us to detect around 10,000 smells. Debates on how exactly odour activates our olfactory receptors are still going on. One theory suggests that weak electrostatic forces between scent molecules trigger vibrational frequencies that get translated into electrical signals through which data on that smell gets delivered to the brain. Another theory states that scent molecules act as a key in a lock system like substrates and enzymes.
Another cartridge-powered gizmo, Scentee, went on sale in 2013 but was discontinued shortly after because people couldn't be bothered to refill cartridges for just a narrow range of smells. The founder, however, shifted his focus entirely and is now working on a device that directly stimulates the olfactory receptors via electrodes through the nostril. The lab results seem promising, but who would want to sit with electrodes inserted into their nostril.
The current problems include timing and distribution of scents, fundamental understanding of human olfactory perception, health dangers of synthetic odours, and many more. Nevertheless, we can hope that we figure out a way around these problems soon & it enhances our multimedia experience, or quality checks can be done before ordering items off the internet.
